#summary Entry point to all of Gosu's documentation.
#labels Featured

= New to Gosu? =

If you are curious about what Gosu is trying to achieve, read Gosu's DesignRationale. If you want to take a look at random Gosu code, see the tutorials below.

= Installation =

Depending on your operating system, see GettingStartedOnOsx, GettingStartedOnWindows or GettingStartedOnLinux. (Before downloading the prebuilt Ruby versions, please note that they are also available via `gem install gosu`!)

= Tutorial =

See either the RubyTutorial or the CppTutorial.

== Translations of the Ruby version ==
*Traditional Chinese* translation by poga: http://devpoga.wordpress.com/2008/05/28/ruby_gosu_tutorial/

*Spanish* translation by ladybenko: http://cafeina.ladybenko.net/?p=485

A *French* introduction by Guigui: http://www.relite.org/forum/ruby-gosu-cours-complet-t4879.html

The original tutorial in *French* (slightly outdated) by Damien Gouteux: http://xitog.developpez.com/tutoriels/gosu/?page=Presentation

= Reference =

C++: See the `reference/index.html` file that comes with all C++ archives.
Ruby: See the RubyReference.

= Ruby Game Packaging =

Since Ruby is not a compiled language, it is not obvious how to release games written in it to the public. For instructions see either RubyPackagingOnOsx or RubyPackagingOnWindows.

= Further inspiration =

There are many games you can take a look at in the [http://www.libgosu.org/cgi-bin/mwf/board_show.pl?bid=2 Gosu Showcase board], and even more useful libraries to use with Gosu in the [http://www.libgosu.org/cgi-bin/mwf/board_show.pl?bid=4 Extending Gosu board]!