#summary How to set up Gosu on Mac OS X.

= Installing Boost (C++ only) =

[http://www.boost.org/ Boost] is a collection of libraries that is used throughout Gosu. Many parts of Boost have been marked for inclusion in the next standard of C++, so it's really worth a look!

Download and extract the latest Boost release. Open Terminal, 'cd' into to that directory and run:

{{{
    ./configure
    make
    sudo make install
    sudo ln -s /usr/local/include/boost-1_34/boost /usr/include/boost
}}}
  
(Replace "1_34" with boost's current version.)

*If you are using MacPorts*, you can also `sudo port install boost`.

= Starting a new Gosu game (C++) =

In Xcode, create a new 'Application/Cocoa Application' project. Remove Resources/MainMenu.nib and main.m (files & references), right-click the project and add a reference to Gosu.framework (wherever you have unpacked it to).

In order to make the Boost headers accessible, select 'Project/Edit Active Project', search for 'Header Search Paths' in 'Build' and set it to `/usr/local/include`, or `/opt/local/include` if you used MacPorts to install Boost.

Your application also needs to include the Gosu.framework bundle. To instruct Xcode to automatically copy it into your application, choose Project/New Build Phase and select "Frameworks" as the Copy Files' target directory. Then locate this new build phase in the targets list and add Gosu.framework to it as well. (Note: You may have to drag & drop the framework into the build phase from the finder, instead of adding it via a right-click.)

You can then add new code files, for example the ones from the tutorial or this minimal application code:

{{{
#include <Gosu/Window.hpp>

class MyWindow : public Gosu::Window
{
public:
    MyWindow()
    : Gosu::Window(640, 480, false, 20)
    {
        setCaption(L"Hello World!");
    }
};

int main(int argc, char* argv[])
{
    MyWindow win;
    win.show();
    return 0;
}
}}}

Note: Usually, you want to right-click your target, Get Info, select Build/All Configurations/Build Locations and *change the Per-configuration Build Products Path to '.'* or something similar, so the application will have the correct position relative to your game's resources.

= Starting a new Gosu game (Ruby) =

Getting started with Ruby is a lot easier (surprise): All you need to do is write down your code and run it in a way that `require 'gosu'` will work, i.e. by copying gosu.bundle into the same directory or installing it in one of Ruby's default library paths.

To test if everything works, you can use this Hello World script:

{{{
require 'gosu'

class MyWindow < Gosu::Window
  def initialize
    super(640, 480, false, 20)
    self.caption = 'Hello World!'
  end
end

w = MyWindow.new
w.show
}}}

That's it — have fun!