#summary How to set up Gosu on Windows.

= Download FMOD (both languages) =

[http://www.fmod.org/ FMOD] is the library we use for everything that involves sound output. As soon as you touch Gosu's sound system during runtime, your application will look for fmod.dll to be accessible in its path. This file is included in FMOD's development SDK: http://www.fmod.org/files/fmodapi375win.zip

= Download Boost, change Visual C++ Directories (C++ only) =

[http://www.boost.org/ Boost] is a collection of libraries that is used throughout Gosu's interface. Many parts of Boost have been marked for inclusion in the next standard of C++, so you'd better look at it anyway! :) Download the latest release and extract it into a separate directory.

In Visual C++, go to Tools/Options/Projects/VC++ Directories. Show directories for include files and add the two directories you extracted boost and Gosu into - not the 'boost' or 'Gosu' subfolders themselves!

Also, select library files, and add the same directory for Gosu so MSVC can find Gosu.lib.

= Creating a new Gosu game (C++) =

Click File/New/Project and select 'Win32 project', then give it a name and in the application settings choose 'Empty project'. Click Finish.

You can then add new code files, for example the ones from the tutorial. *Important: You need to go into the project options, select C/C++ options, then Language and change the used library from "Multithreaded DLL" to "Multithreaded", and "Multithreaded Debug DLL" to "Multithreaded Debug", respectively - or you will get linker errors!* These options are usually only available after adding the first C++ source file.

If you need a starting point or want to test if everything is correctly set up, select File/New, add a new C++ source file and use this code to compile and run:

{{{
#include <Gosu/AutoLink.hpp>
#include <Gosu/Window.hpp>

class MyWindow : public Gosu::Window
{
public:
    MyWindow()
    : Gosu::Window(640, 480, false, 20)
    {
        setCaption(L"Hello World!");
    }
};

int main(int argc, char* argv[])
{
    MyWindow win;
    win.show();
    return 0;
}
}}}

When loading resources, keep in mind that Gosu's resourcePrefix() will point to the directory your .EXE is located in. You may need to adjust your project settings to build into the directory where your resources reside.

= Creating a new Gosu game (Ruby) =

Getting started with Ruby is a lot easier: Create a new Ruby source file, copy gosu.so (and if necessary, fmod.dll) into the same directory and start away. Here is a minimal application to test if everything works:

{{{
require 'gosu'

class MyWindow < Gosu::Window
  def initialize
    super(640, 480, false, 20)
    self.caption = 'Hello World!'
  end
end

w = MyWindow.new
w.show
}}}

That's it — have fun!