#summary How to wrap up Ruby/Gosu games for deployment on Mac OS X.

= Ruby/Gosu Packaging on Mac OS X with the experimental Ruby 1.9.1 Bundle =

The Mac package of Gosu (on the Downloads list) comes with a mysterious `RubyGosu App.app` bundle. All you have to do to share your game with the public is following these easy steps:
  * Duplicate this bundle, open its contents via the right-click menu
  * Copy your game files into the `Contents/Resources` subfolder (Gosu libraries are not necessary, they are built in)
  * Rename your game's main source file to `Main.rb`
And you're done! You now have a fully functional .app bundle.

The .app is a self-contained Ruby 1.9.1 (core) installation. This especially means that you need to put comments of the form `# Encoding: UTF -8` on the first line of every source file that uses non-ASCII characters. If you need to use libraries other than Ruby's core and Gosu, see the Extending Gosu forum for advice.

= Ruby/Gosu Packaging with the Light-Weight Ruby 1.8 Bundle =

The older, better-tested method of packaging Ruby games for OS X involves the more lightweight `RubyGosu Deployment Template.app` that can be found as a separate download. Here you also have to put your game into the `Contents/Resources` folder, but you need to include the files in Gosu's `lib` folder as well, because Ruby is not built into this template. Actually, it just calls the OS X system Ruby to run your game.

If you want to ship RMagick with your game, see [http://www.libgosu.org/cgi-bin/mwf/topic_show.pl?tid=42 this useful forum thread by codekitchen].